
Transcriber’s Note


This document uses the “long s” character ſ extensively, so is best
viewed with a font containing that symbol.




                         THE

               Charitable Peſtmaſter,

                         OR,

                   The cure of the

                       PLAGUE,

  Conteining a few ſhort and neceſſary inſtructions
   how to preſerve the body from infection of the
     P L A G V E, as alſo to cure thoſe that are
                      Infected.

     _Together with a little treatiſe concerning
              the cure of the Small Pox._

   Publiſhed for the benefit of the poore of this
          City and not unmeet for the Rich,

  _By T h o m a s  S h e r w o o d Practitioner in
                      PHYSICK._

                   _2 Kings 20.7._

   _And I S A I A H ſaid, take a lump of Figs, and
    they tooke, and laid it upon the boil, and he
                     recovered._


                       LONDON
   Printed by _A.N._ for _John Francklin_, and are
    to be ſold at his Shop in _Lothbury_, neer the
                   Windmill. 1641.




  To the Worſhipfull _Alexander Read_,
    Doctor of Phyſick and Chirurgery,
       one of the Societie of the
        Colledge of Phyſicians for
          the Citie of _London_.


_Sir, having finiſhed this_ treatiſe, _I conſidered what entertainment
it might find in the world; and fearing, that it would be envied, for
the good that it offereth unto this Kingdome, as I the Author have
been for my practice, I bethought my ſelfe that it might ſafely hover
under your wings, whereupon I am bold to thruſt it into your
protection, that it may the better be defended from the calumnies of
theſe times. The Subject of it is, that which I have practiſed and
proved by Experience, ſo that if there bee occaſion, I believe I ſhall
bee able to render ſufficient reaſons to prove it, from the moſt
Authentique rules in Phyſick. And if there be any errors eſcaped in
it, I ſhall rather deſire that they may be corrected by the diſcretiõ
of you or any of the Colledg of Phyſicians, than diſputed upon by new
beginners in the practice of Phyſick, who have but ſmall experience.
As for thoſe Medicines publiſhed at the latter end of this booke, I
ſhall not deſire your protection for them, becauſe I never made you,
nor any man acquainted with them. For I intended that they ſhould be
Protectors for themſelves: but however I hope that my endeavours in
this ſmall treatiſe will not be unpleaſant, but acceptable to you, for
the good which I believe it will do in the World; and ſo for this time
I reſt in ſome meaſure of aſſurance of your worſhips favour._

                                        Your Servant,
                                            Tho: Sherwood.




_To the friendly Reader._


Having conſidered with my ſelfe in theſe dangerous times the great
diſtreſſes of the poore of this City, by reaſon of the contagious
diſeaſe of the peſtilence, now reigning amongſt them; and ſeeing them
to be altogether ignorant, in the uſe of thoſe meanes that are
convenient for their cure, as purging, vomiting, bleeding, ſweating,
and the like: Therefore conſidering what good theſe few rules
(experimented by my ſelfe) may do unto many, I was thereby moved to
print them, for the benefit of ſuch who want the helpe of the
skilfull and faithfull Phyſician. For the underſtanding and memory of
thoſe that ſhall have occaſion to uſe them, I have divided them into
three Chapters, with contents. As for the medicines preſcribed, they
are ſold by Apothecaries, who may afford them reaſonably to the
poore: The others adjoyned I ſhall give to the poore for Gods ſake,
  and the rich ſhall have them for competent ſatisfaction;
              but I ſhall eſteeme it my greateſt
                 reward, if any ſhall receive
                     good and benefit by
                       my ſmall labours
                        and endevours.

                                        _Thine T. S._




CHAP. 1.

  _1. What are the cauſes of the Peſtilence. 2. How they are
   avoided. 3. Means to preſerve the body from Infection._


There are divers cauſes of this diſeaſe. The firſt is ſin, which ought
to be repented of. The ſecond an infected and corrupted air, which
ſhould be avoided. The third an evill diet, which ſhould be amended.
The fourth are evill humours heaped together in the body, being apt
to putrifie, and beget a Fever, which muſt be taken away by convenient
medicines.

Therefore whoſoever would preſerve their bodies from infection, let
them firſt make their peace with God, in whoſe hand is the power of
life and death. Then let them uſe the meanes, and ſhun all thoſe
things that are able to beget this diſeaſe, as all infected and
corrupted aire, all fogges and miſts that do ariſe from the earth or
water, and all ſtinking ſmels that do ariſe from dunghills, ſinks,
graves, carrion, ſnuffs of candles, or rotten fruits, or any thing
elſe that doth putrifie and ſtink. Abſtain from all meats and drinks
that beget rottenneſſe and filthineſſe in the body (& ſo conſequently
a Fever or the Plague) as exceſſive eating of fruits, eſpecially thoſe
that are unripe. Alſo forbear all ſorts of fiſh that have neither
ſcales nor ſhels, as Eels, Lampreys, and the like. Laſtly, take heed
of over-charging the ſtomacke with meats, or drinks, or hot Wines;
but eſpecially your unripe medium Wines.

If any ſhall find themſelves oppreſſed with groſs & corrupt humors, ſo
that they are in danger of this diſeaſe they ſhall be cleanſed, by
taking one ounce and half, or two ounces, of the infuſion _Crocus
metallorum_, (which is to be bought at every Apothecaries) & put to it
_Oximel_ half an ounce, this ſhall give them five or ſix vomits, and
almoſt as many ſtooles. And after every vomit, let them drinke ſome
warme poſſet drinke; ſo let them keepe themſelves warme that day: one
houre after it hath done working let them eat a meſſe of warm broth
made with a neck of Mutton, or with ſuch freſh meat as the ſick are
beſt able to buy; of which meat let them eat ſparingly for the
preſent. Thoſe that are ſo tender or weakly that they cannot brook
this vomit, they may be very well purged from corrupt humours, by
taking one or two drams of _pilulæ Peſtilentiales_: But the poorer
ſort that cannot goe to this charge, may take inſtead thereof _Aloes_
one dram in the pap of an Apple, ſtewed Prunes, or elſe in a little
Ale or Beere. This pill, and this _Aloes_, are excellent remedies for
women and children, and they are ſo ſafe that women with child may
take them. After the bodie is purged, it ſhall be neceſſary to draw
ſix or eight ounces of bloud from the liver or middle vein of the
arme, if the partie be able to ſuſtain the loſſe of it.

Such as have lived temperatly and ſparingly, and ſo conſequently are
not oppreſſed with corrupted humours, ſuch ſhall not need any the
aforeſaid evacuations or purgations; but let them ſhun, as much as
they can, all infectious and corrupted aire: But ſeeing it is a thing
almoſt impoſsible in the Citie of _London_; therefore they that are
timorous and fearefull may carry about them the roots of _Enula
campana_, and _Angelica_, dried or candied, of which they may bite now
and then. Alſo the waters of _Scabios_, _Angelica_, or _Pimpernell_,
are great preſervations for children againſt the Plague, if two
ſpoonfuls thereof be taken in a morning faſting.




CHAP. 2.

  _1 By what ſignes you may know whether the ſick be infected with
   the Peſtilence. 2 How thoſe ſignes doe encreaſe or decreaſe every
   day; 3 Whether life or death be likely to enſue; 4 A caveat not
   to tamper with thoſe that begin to amend of themſelves._


Thoſe that are infected with the Peſtilence, in the beginning or firſt
day thereof, are taken with an extraordinary cold outwardly, and a
burning heate inwardly, a great paine and girding about the ſtomacke,
a ſluggiſhneſſe and drouſineſſe of the whole body, a loſſe of appetite,
a bitterneſſe in the throat, with a deſire to vomit, & ſometimes they
do vomit.

The diſeaſe continuing unto the ſecond and third day, the heate
breaketh outwardly, ſtronger, and ſtronger, ſo that there followeth a
great paine in the head, and a difficulty of breathing, ſuperfluous
ſleeps, and ſometimes ſuperfluous watchings, they grow frantike and
light-headed, and they looke very ſtaringly: And if there doth any
ſwelling appear under the eares, armes, cheeks, or groines, and that
theſe ſignes aforenamed doe begin to ceaſe, Then ſhall the ſick
recover immediatly without any medicine, onely give him a plaſter or
pulteſſe to ripen the tumour, which muſt be applyed the next day after
the ſwelling appeareth; but give him nothing inwardly, except it be a
warme Caudle, or Ale-brue, or Broth; for if you give him a vomit or
purge, you ſhall ſtrike the ſwelling into the noble parts, and the
ſick ſhall be in danger of his life: and if you let him bloud, you
ſhall draw the venemous humour from the Soare into the veins, and
diſperſe it with the bloud through the whole body, and thereby deſtroy
the health of the patient, and ſhorten his life; as it came to paſſe
with a good friend of mine. Alſo if you give him any medicine to
provoke ſweat, you ſhall reſtore the Fever again, and ſo the ſicke
ſhall die without redemption; yea, and more miſerably, then thoſe that
never amended, unleſſe God be more mercifull unto him; whereof I have
had a ſorrowfull experience.

Therefore bee carefull that you doe not tamper with thoſe that do
begin to amend: for thoſe very Medicines that are excellently
available againſt any Fevers in the beginning or encreaſe of them,
being given in the declination or recovery, will bring the patient
into a Relapſe, which is worſe then the former diſeaſe, and which
ſhall greatly endanger life. For how many have died by the
unſeaſonable taking of Treacle, Mithridate, and other good Medicines?
Wherefore I have often ſaid, that a skilfull Phyſician by watching his
time ſhall doe more with a cup of warme drinke in the cure of the
Plague, or any Fever, then the ignorant ſhall do with all the
excellent Medicines that are in the Apothecaries Shop.

Now if the riſing doe appear, & that the ſymptoms or ſignes aforenamed
doe not begin to ceaſe, but rather encreaſe, Then ſhortly after there
will appeare ſome blains or ſpots, & ſo death enſueth, unleſſe you
draw ten or twelve ounces of bloud (according to the ſtrength of the
ſick) from the liver or middle vein of the arme, on that ſide where
the riſing is.

But if ſo be that the ſickneſſe continueth unto the third and fourth
day, and the ſymptomes remaine in their full vigour, then ſhortly will
the ſpots come forth; and then I know no medicine that can deliver
from death, except God be more mercifull to the ſick: But only on the
third day before the ſpots appear it ſhall be greatly available to
give him one of the cordial ſweats preſcribed in the enſuing Chapter.




CHAP. 3.

  _1 Here are preſcribed certain approved remedies for the cure of
   the Peſtilence, 2 The order and manner how to uſe them._


Whoſoever ſhal perceive their bodies infected with the Plague, let
them take on the firſt day of the ſickneſſe the vomit, in that order
and manner as it is laid down in the firſt Chapter. And after it hath
done working with them, they ſhal find themſelves as well as ever
they were in their lives: for it clenſeth the ſtomack and bowels from
al corrupt humours, which is one of the chiefeſt cauſes of the
ſicknes. But if the ſick be weak and cannot bear a vomit, it ſhall be
good to give him one dram of the foreſaid _pillulæ peſtilentiales_, or
inſtead thereof one dram of _Aloes_, you may give it either in pill or
in potion, according as the ſick can beſt take it, and in the working
of it let him drink ſome warm broth.

But if it be ſo, that this courſe hath been neglected the firſt day,
or beyond the time of 24 houres, it will bee in vaine to uſe it the
ſecond day: Yea, it will bee dangerous, ſeeing that the infection is
diſperſed by the bloud throughout all the Veines of the bodie.
Therefore on the ſecond day of Viſitation it ſhall bee good to draw
from the Median Veine of the arme ſo much bloud as the patient can
endure to bleed: and if the ſicke hath not gone to the ſtoole during
the time of his ſickneſſe, you ſhall give him either before or after
bleeding this Clyſter. _Take of Beets, Violet leaves, Burrage,
Bugloſſe, Scabios, of each one handfull, French barley one ounce;
boyle all theſe in a ſufficient quantitie of water untill it be halfe
conſumed, then ſtrain it, and take three quarters of a pint of the
decoction, and put to it of the Electuary of Hierapicra five or ſixe
drams, oile of Rue one dram, red Sugar one ounce, the yolk of an egge,
and a little ſalt; ſo make you a Clyſter thereof and adminiſter it
bloud warme._ Alſo you may adminiſter to the ſick this Clyſter. _Boyle
an handfull of Rue in a pint of poſſet drinke, and put to it a piece
of ſweet butter, a little honey, the yolke of an egge, and a thimble
full of ſalt; make a clyſter and adminiſter it bloud warme._

But if that the ſick amend not upon this courſe taken the ſecond day,
or that this means hath not been uſed, but that hee continued ſick
untill the third and fourth day, ſo that the infection hath taken hold
of the vitall ſpirits, Then keeping him warme in his bed, you ſhall
uſe this Cordiall to ſweat with all. _Take of the water of Scabios,
Burrage, Bugloſſe, and Angelica, of each halfe an ounce, the Electuary
of egges two ſcruples, or one dram, of Bole Armoniak one ſcruple,
Syrrup of Roſes halfe an ounce, make it into a potion_, and let the
ſick drink it up at once or twice: two or three ſpoonfuls hereof is
ſufficient for a child. Or the poorer ſort may take two peny-worth of
Treacle or Mithridate, in a quarter of a pint of Dragon water. With
either of theſe Medicines you may ſweat the ſick, untill ſome tumour
doth appeare, or that he commeth to know himſelfe amended. For this is
the laſt medicinall refuge we have in the cure of the Plague. If you
can, keep the ſick from drinking and ſleeping for the ſpace of three
houres untill the medicine hath done working. But if you cannot, let
the patient drinke a little Limon poſſet, made with ſome Marigold
flowers, and Harts horn.

And if ſignes of amendment doe appeare, doe not take him out of his
bed, or let him coole ſuddenly: But let him ſweat on gently of his own
accord, for it is natures ſweat following the medicine, which will doe
him more good than a Kingdome. In this laſt ſweat you may give him
ſome Caudle or Alebrue: & when the ſweats begin to ceaſe of themſelves,
& his skin grows dry and warme, then let him ſit up by a good fire;
Aire his cloathes, and ſo let him give God thanks for his life.

Adde, if any tumour appeare you may ripen it with this Emplaſter.
_Take ſix figs, raiſins of the Sun ſtoned half an ounce, ſalt two
drams, honey one ounce, beat them all together, and heat it well with
ſome oile of Camomill upon the fire, ſo ſpread it upon ſome cloth_,
and lay it warm to the tumour, ſhifting it every twelve houres untill
it look with a white head: and when it is ripe, if it be difficult to
break, lay to it ſome Gooſe dung made warme with ſome ſweet butter or
ſallet oile; alſo the root of a white Lilly roſted, with ſome ſorrell,
to which put a piece of ſweet butter, & apply it very warm to the
ſoare, But if it will not break with this means, then you muſt open it
with a penknife or lancet; elſe the corruption will rot the fleſh,
even to the very bone, and when you have opened it, ſqueeze out the
corruption with your hands, and put into the ſoare, a tent made with
_unguentum baſilicon_, or _Ægyptiacum, & mel roſarum_, and lay upon
the tent a plaſter made with _Diachilon_: Continue your tents untill
all the corruption be drawn out, then the plaſter of _Diachilon_ will
cure it perfectly.

If any that are ancient or weak ſhall be infected with the Peſtilence,
it ſhall not be neceſſary to give them any purge, vomit, or ſweat, or
to let them bloud; becauſe they cannot beare the loſſe of ſo many
ſpirits as are ſpent by ſuch evacuations. Therefore you may lay upon
the pit of the ſtomack of the ſicke a young live puppy, and if the
ſick can but ſleep the ſpace of three or foure houres, they ſhall
recover preſently, and the dog ſhall die of the Plague. This I have
known approved; and I do believe that it will be a cure for all leane,
ſpare, and weake bodies both yong and old: provided, that the dog be
yonger then the ſick.




_Certaine Inſtructions for the cure of the Small Pox._


The nature of the Smal Pox diſperſed this yeer throughout many parts
of this Kingdome, I have found to bee more malignant, then any that
have reigned in my remembrance; ſo that many of all ages and ſexes,
but eſpecially children have miſerably died of them: becauſe for the
moſt part, the peſtilence is joyned with them, as it doth plainly
appeare by thoſe ſpots, blains, and riſings, that follow them. I have
likewiſe obſerved that thoſe medicines, as _Mithridate_, _Treacle_,
_Saffron_ and the like, that formerly have cured the ſmall Pox, now
availe nothing: yea, they are dangerous, if inwardly taken (eſpecially
if the Patient hath been long ſick) but if they be outwardly applyed,
as I ſhall ſhew eft-ſoons, they will prove good remedies at this time.
But how many a tender hearted mother have I ſeen that, out of an
unhappie care of her ſicke childe, hath by raſh counſel & the
unſeaſonable giving to it hot cordiall medicines, encreaſed the Fever,
multiplyed the matter of the ſmall pox, and inflamed the Spirits, ſo
that the Peſtilence hath many times followed. But howſoever the child
hath beene uncurable, which otherwiſe if nothing at all, or elſe ſome
ſmall thing of little ſtrength, had been adminiſtred, might have
recovered; whereupon I obſerved the ſundry ways and meanes practiſed
by Phyſitians, women, and my ſelfe, and ſeeing the diverſe events of
them, I laboured to find out a certain and ſecure way for the cure of
this diſeaſe; which having found by experience I have (together with
this treatiſe of the Plague) ſent it to the Preſſe, hoping that no man
will either hate mee, or envie mee, for doing good, and that thoſe
that find benefit by it will thank me for it.

The Primitive or externall cauſes of the Small Pox are all one with
thoſe which are of the Plague, as an evill and corrupted aire, a
diſorderly dyet, that begets ſurfets; as alſo for the antecedent
cauſes which are corrupt humours heaped together in the body:
therefore thoſe meanes that I have preſcribed in the firſt Chapter to
preſerve the bodie from the infection of the Plague, they will alſo
bee a meanes to preſerve from the Small Pox. Thoſe that are taken ſick
this yeere with the Small Pox are affected after the ſame manner as
thoſe that are infected with the peſtilence, & in the beginning it can
ſcarcely be diſcerned by an expert Phyſitian from it, But only by
theſe ſignes.

Thoſe that are infected by the ſmall Pox are not ſo violently affected
with heat and cold, nor pains in the ſtomack and head, as thoſe that
are ſick with the Peſtilence.

Moreover, thoſe that will have the ſmall Pox their skin is puft up,
and blown like a bladder, ſo that their face and eyes doe ſhine: they
have a great itching in many parts of their bodies, but chiefly about
their Noſe; they yawn much, alſo they finde a great paine and
heavineſſe in their back bone.

Now if you ſhall perceive by theſe ſignes, that the ſick will have the
ſmall Pox, keep him warm, but not too hot; neither let him take cold;
but give him breathing room enough, as he lyeth in his bed: Then lay a
plaſter of Mithridate or Treacle to the pit of his ſtomack, and if hee
be at mans eſtate, let him drinke up all this Cordiall by two or three
ſpoonfuls at a time every houre; but if it be a child, the one halfe
will be ſufficient. _Take of the waters of Roſes, Burrage, Bugloſſe,
and Treacle-water, of each an ounce & half, of the ſyrrup of Limons,
and Clove-gilly-flowers of each one ounce, mix them together, and make
thereof a potion_: Alſo the poorer ſort may take _Roſes, Burrage,
Carduus, Marigold Flowers, and Harts horn, of each a like quantitie,
and boyle them in poſſet drinke, turned with a Limon, or white wine_:
for one above twenty yeers of age let him drink three quarters of a
pint at ſeverall times, ſweetned with Sugar; and for a child halfe the
quantitie will ſuffice. Let the ſick ſweat gently with either of theſe
Medicines ſo long as hee can well endure it: for the longer the
better; ſeeing the Medicines of themſelves are no violent ſweats; &
during the ſweat you may give him now and then to quench his thirſt a
very little Limon poſſet-drink by it ſelf. If he can you may let him
ſleep whilſt he ſweateth. And if hee lie quiet during the ſweat, by
Gods bleſſing, within the ſpace of eight or ten houres at the moſt, he
ſhall find himſelf finely recovered of his ſickneſſe. Then give him no
more of his Cordial or ſweating poſſet drink, but only of his
Limõ-poſſet drink, if he be thirſty; but let him lie warm in his bed
til his skin grow dry, then ſhortly after the Pox will begin to ſhew
themſelves. But they will not bee many although every one of them
will be far greater then the ſmall Pox do uſe to be; yet none of them
will pit except they be much tampered withal, or picked with the
nails. But if ſo be that thoſe which have white heads do burn and rage
extreamly, you may prick their heads with a Needle and let out the
corruption: there is nothing elſe to be done with thoſe upon whom they
are come out, and the Fever abated but that they keepe themſelves
warm, ſit ſtill and be quiet.

But if that the ſick hath not gone to ſtool in a long time: before you
give him this Cordiall to ſweat, you ſhall cauſe him to goe to ſtoole
by a clyſter, or elſe which is better by a Suppoſitor made with Honey
and Salt, or a Violet Comfit. And if the ſicke bee yong, ſtrong, and
full of bloud, you ſhall without danger doe very well, if you draw
from him eight or ten ounces of bloud before you lay him to ſweat; for
then the Cordiall will have more power, room, and liberty, to play
upon the diſeaſe, and will the ſooner and better drive out the Pox. If
the _quinteſſentia vitæ_ be given in the waters of Roſes, Burrage, or
Bugloſſe, it will drive out the ſmall Pox without ſweating, and cure
the ſick immediatly.

But if the ſmall Pox be come forth, and that the Fever continue in his
full vigour ſtill, ſo that the ſick doth not amend, but grow worſe and
worſe, then you ſhall not give them any hot Medicines inwardly, nor
any thing that doth provoke ſweat; for now hot cordiall Medicines will
encreaſe the Fever (and in the beginning they would have quenched the
Fever) and turn all the humours of the body into the matter of the
ſmall Pox; ſo that there is nothing but a miſerable death likely to
follow, oftentimes accompanied with the Peſtilence.

This evill is much practiſed by thoſe women that pretẽd they wil drive
the ſmal Pox further out, when they are come out already. Wherefore
they do but beget the Fever again, and where there are but ten they
will make a thouſand. Therefore be carefull in this caſe, what you do,
and give to the ſick every hower nothing elſe but two or three
ſpoonefulls of Roſe water, ſweetened with a little ſugar. This will
coole the body, quench the Fever, cauſe reſt, and then a ſtoole, and
thereby the ſick ſhall recover preſently. By theſe meanes I have cured
many very ſuddenly that have been dangerouſly ſick in all mens ſight
even to Death, as many in the City can beare mee witneſſe.

As I have warned you not to give many hot things when the ſmall Pox
are come forth, ſo I would have you beware of giving thoſe that are
very cold, as the waters of Plantane, Letice, Purſlane, Poppy, and the
like; which (as I have Knowne) have relieved many for the preſent, and
wrought an admirable cure in the ſight of the common people; but by
their cold qualities, they have ſo congealed and ſetled the humours in
the body, that the ſick will never be healthfull all the daies of
their lives, as I could inſtance in many.




Thoſe that deſire further information concerning any particulars not
expreſſed at larg in this brief Treatiſe, they ſhall be fully
ſatisfied, if they repaire to the Author living in Hony-ſuckle Court
in Grub-ſtreet, where he hath by Chimicall Art prepared ſix
Catholicall Medicines, with which hee cureth the Peſtilence, ſmall
Pox, and moſt curable diſeaſes whatſoever.


_1 Vomitivum Benedictum._

This Medicine being taken from five graines to eight, in ſome
convenient diſtilled water or wine, or elſe with ſome Conſerve or
Pill, doth ſafely purge upwards and downwards, ſo that it may be given
to a Childe, of three or foure yeeres of age: it cureth all diſeaſes
that ariſe from the foulneſſe of the ſtomack, and is good in the
beginning of the Peſtilence, ſmall Pox, or any Fever, or Ague.


_2 Catharticum Catholicum._

The doſe of it is from ten grains to twenty, it purgeth gently by
ſtoole, and clenſeth the lower belly from all offenſive humours, &
cureth the French Pox, Scurvy, Jaundis, and Dropſie, alſo it freeth
children from Worms.


_3 Diureticum Aperitivum._

This openeth all obſtructions of the body, but chiefly of the Liver,
Spleen, Reines, and Bladder, it cureth the Jaundis and the Rickets in
children, alſo it helpeth thoſe that cannot make water.


_4 Diaphoreticum Cordiale._

This being given in a ſmall doſe doth gently provoke ſweat, expelleth
all venomous humours from the heart outwardly, and driveth out the
ſmall Pox, thruſteth out the tumours in the Peſtilence, and ſome it
cureth without bringing forth a Riſing.


_5 Quinta Eſſentia vitæ._

This reviveth the vitall ſpirits, and hath an admirable vertue in
fortifying the heart againſt all infectious, & venemous vapours; ſo
that it is good for thoſe that have occaſiõ to viſit ſick people. If
ten or twelve drops thereof be taken in a mornings draught it
preſerveth the body from infection, and if twenty or thirty drops of
it bee given to the ſicke of the Peſtilence, within the ſpace of ſixe
houres after they are infected, they ſhall be cured in one hour, as I
have often proved: it driveth out the ſmall Pox, and cureth the ſick
without ſweating.


_6 Iulapium Reſtaurativum._

By the vertue this Medicine hath in reſiſting the putrifaction of
humours, it doth cure all ſorts of Fevers and Agues, it may be given
in any time of the diſeaſe, but eſpecially in the latter end of the
ſickneſſe, when no other Medicine can be adminiſtred without danger.
With it I have cured the Hectick Fever, and thoſe that have faln into
the Relapſe of the ſmall Pox, and ſuch as have been nigh unto death,
by reaſon of violent Fevers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Any of the aforeſaid Medicines, the Author adminiſtreth both outwardly
and inwardly in many ſeverall wayes and manners, according to the age,
temperature, complexion, and diſpoſition, of the bodie; and according
to the nature, degrees, and time of the diſeaſe.

  _Artis_ Apollineæ _vis ſola eſt numen_ Olympi,
    _Quo ſine languenti Pharmaca fruſtra dabis._

   If that our art from God receive not ſtrength,
   In vain we ſeek mans life for to prolength.


_FINIS._



Transcriber’s Note


Four typographical errors have been corrected: “Scabies” replaced by
“Scabios”, “for for” by “for”, “Safforn” replaced by “Saffron”, and
“harh” by “hath”.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Charitable Pestmaster, by Thomas Sherwood

